---
title: "Support & Accessibility"
---

Support & Accessibility
=======================

Making materials accessible to people with cognitive and learning disabilities
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*by Sue FW*

[This resource](https://www.w3.org/TR/coga-usable/) was created by the
Cognitive and Learning Disabilities Task Force as a guideline for making
online resources accessible.

Respect at Edinburgh
--------------------

*By Sue FW*

The University has a zero-tolerance stance towards any form of bullying
and harassment.  The [Respect at Edinburgh web
hub](https://www.edweb.ed.ac.uk/equality-diversity/respect) brings
together information and guidance on the Dignity & Respect policy, the
processes for raising and addressing concerns, and the support and
training available.

University services including counselling, disability service etc.
------------------------------------------------------------------

\[needs content\]

Lone working - what is it and how to do it safely
-------------------------------------------------

*By Shereen Sharaan*

**Definition:** 'lone working' involves carrying out work duties
remotely and without direct supervision to control, guide or help in
uncertain situations, during working hours or out of hours, locations
can vary (based in various places for periods of time) or fixed (same
place).

**How to do it safely: Know the Building Procedures**

- Familiarity with exits and alarms

- Access to a telephone and first aid kit

- Secure contacts of someone else present within the same building to
  be contacted in an emergency

- Follow sign-in and sign-out procedures

**How to do it safely: Know your Personal Safety**

- Identify a person based where you are with whom you can share
  details of your location, work plan, estimated time of leaving and
  returning, etc.

- Let that same person know if you deviate from your work plan

- Let that same person know, in the event you do not report as
  expected (within a certain timeframe), they need to follow up on the
  situation and then proceed with contacting your emergency contact
  person if needed.

- Allow that same person access to a contact at your work session
  (someone to follow up with)

- Have access to a working phone at all times, with sufficient credit

- Make sure there are no risks with accessing or working from a
  particular location (any known hazards? Any relevant history? High
  crime rates?)

- Avoid working in deserted areas / working at late hours of the night

- Secure appropriate health insurance coverage where you are remotely
  based

- When working remotely, ensure you are in regular contact with your
  overseas supervision team

- Think about your tone of voice and choice of words when working solo
  and remotely, and be aware of your own triggers

- Be aware of social, cultural, and religious differences when working
  remotely

- Discuss with in-charge what strategies or techniques to apply when
  working with vulnerable or potentially difficult groups

- Detailed record-keeping when doing home and school visits (includes
  what was discussed, any concerns no matter how trivial, etc.)

- If the lone worker has any medical conditions, it is essential to
  make them known to others when working remotely (medical bracelet,
  etc.)

- External doors should be locked to avoid any unwelcome / unwanted
  visitors while working alone

- Trust your instincts, work out alternative arrangement if you are
  uncomfortable with any visit

- Try to schedule appointments in advance and offer multiple choices

- If sensitive information is revealed to you (from a vulnerable
  participant for example) be sure to report it to in-charge
  authority.

Things to think about when collecting data internationally
----------------------------------------------------------

1)  Research Approvals: Regulatory Authorities

Depending on the nature of your research project (medical, non-medical,
etc.) and the organizations you intend to approach for research
recruitment (schools, research centers, hospitals, etc.), you might
require the approval of one or more regulatory authorities in that
country (such as ministries, education councils and health authorities
to name a few main ones). In some countries, it can be difficult to
determine who to approach for approval, and in fact, whether you even
need approval in the first place (beyond the approval of the
participating organization).

If you've researched the main regulatory authorities in that country
(surfed their websites, send them your inquiries by email, called them,
etc.) and still couldn't find a lead, you would do very well to get in
touch with one or two bodies you are considering to approach for
recruitment and inquire if they need any approvals to take part in
external research. Organizations that have experience collaborating with
local and international researchers will be expecting this inquiry from
an external researcher and should be able to put you on the right path
moving forward. This could potentially reveal some useful insights about
regulatory bodies to approach, procedures to undertake, and possibly
contact personnel to follow up with in case of delays.

2)  Differences: Language, Culture, and Social Norms

You must be armed with some knowledge of language, culture, and social
norms before visiting any country for the first time, let alone if you
are visiting for research purposes, as its success depends on the
support of the community. You would do well to identify beforehand
whether the country generally adopts a high-context culture (implicit
communication that relies heavily on context with value placed on
interpersonal relationships) or a low-context culture (explicit verbal
communication, and less close-knit). Joining community groups on social
media and reading up on blogs from locals and travelers could certainly
offer useful insights on that note (perhaps even touch on aspects of
daily life like gift-giving, tips, etc.). While this maybe my own
personal viewpoint (from my own experience), I do feel that it is
imperative for a researcher to make the effort to engage in local
language and social norms. Ask lots of questions and express interest.
The effort does not go unnoticed and you are more likely to make
meaningful connections.

3)  Logistics: Do Your Homework

When scheduling research internationally with members of a community, be
mindful of researching major holidays and events (Ramadan, Eid, Chinese
New Year, Independence Day, etc.) which vary from country to country.
Often, celebrations or commitments can extend beyond the days indicated
on a calendar.

Finally, sorting out transport (public transport, car rental, etc.) and
other resources at the research site (Wi-Fi, printer, etc.) is essential
to ensure a smooth research schedule.

Local services for families with autistic children
--------------------------------------------------

*by Sue FW*

I get fairly regular emails from people -- parents of autistic children
- asking me for advice on local services etc. Here's a list of things I
often share -- obviously this should be tailored to the specific
circumstances and query of the family:

Grow Communication is a lovely local speech & language group providing
independent services: <http://www.growsalt.uk/>

Tailor Ed is another local organisation that provides autism-specific
support: <http://tailoredfoundation.co.uk/> 

Bounce OT is a great occupational therapy
organisation: <https://bouncet.com/>

You can also get excellent advise from the Scottish Autism
Helpline: <https://www.scottishautism.org/> 
